# Baqend Dashboard

The Baqend dashboard is the main tool, which you will use to manage and configure your Baqend instance. After you have
created your first app, you have in the left navigation bar a quick overview over all the configurable and usable 
 functionalities of Baqend.
  
Here is a quick overview of those:

**Baqend Modules** - can be used to create Baqend code, which can later be called by your app to execute trusted
business logic. See also [Baqend Modules](#modules). By clicking the *+* you can create new modules, Afterwards a module 
code template will be opened.

**Tables** - are the part where you can create and extend the data model of Baqend to fit your app requirements.
By clicking on the class name, you can view and edit the table content and its metadata like schema, access 
rules and code hooks. Each table is represented by one entity class and each row is an instance of this class in the SDK.
On the upper right side you can navigate with the tabs through those categories:

  - **Data:** This is the default view of a class and shows the stored instances in a table. You can view, navigate and search 
  in the table. In addition you can add new rows, modify fields and delete existing rows. You can im- and export
  the entire table content and truncate (drop all rows) of the table. [Read More](#crud)
  - **Schema:** Each class is described by its schema. The schema describes which fields a class have and which type 
  those fields have. When you insert data into the table, the data will always be validated against the defined 
  schema and modifications which violate the schema will be rejected. Baqend supports many common types, such as 
  primitive types, geo points, references, collections, json and embedded types. [Read More](#schema-and-types)
  - **ACL (Access Control List):** In many apps you would like to restrict the access who is allowed to read and write 
  the data. Therefore you can restrict the access per operation on class or object level. In this view you can modify 
  the access permission for the selected class. You can add new users and roles to the acl and can specify those access 
  restrictions. [Read more](#users-roles-and-permissions)
  - **Handler:** are Baqend code hooks, which are invoked before an object is modified. Here you can implement custom
  logic that is invoked every time when an object is inserted, updated or deleted. Within the code you can validate the 
  modification, modify some fields or can completely reject the modifications as your needs. [Read More](#handlers)

There are three predefined classes which you can also extend with custom fields:
  
  - **User:** are used to represent a user which is logged in into your app. New users can be created by a registration 
  process or by a login through an [OAuth](#oauth-login) provider when configured. [Read More](#registration)
  - **Role:** Roles can be created to group users and together and use those groups to give them special privileges 
  such as ACLs. There are three predefined roles the admin role, the loggedin role and the node role. Roles contains a predefined users list 
  field, which contains all the members of the role. [Read More](#roles)
  - **Device:** represents registered devices which can later be used to send them push notifications out of Baqend
  code. Devices can be queried like any other table to send a push notification to multiple devices at once. 
  [Read More](#push-notifications)

Additionally you can create a new custom classes with a click on the *+* button near the *Data* label. Type a none used 
name and hit enter. The schema view will appear and you can begin to model your own class schema.

**Logs** - Here you can view the logs generated by accessing the api and your application logs.

  - **AccessLog:** Each request wich is served by our Baqend servers or the CDN generates a log entry. You can view and 
  search in the access logs within a period of 30 days. [Read More](#app-logging)
  - **AppLog:** While developing and later in production is is really common to log specific actions of your app or 
  Baqend code for debugging and usage analysis. Therefore the SDK provides a simple logging API that you can use to
  create log entries which are kept for an period of 30 days. [Read More](#access-logs)
 
**API Explorer** - The API Explorer provides a GUI to serve the underlying REST API of Baqend. Here you can explore and
made direct HTTP calls to your Baqend server.
 
**Settings** - Her you can configure additional settings of your Baqend app like:
  
  - E-Mailing used by the registration process
  - OAuth settings to enable oauth login
  - Push Notifications certificates and keys needed to actually push notifications
